Questions:

Operating System:
    What is the main purpose of an operating system? Discuss different types? 
    What is a socket, kernel and monolithic kernel ? 
    Difference between process and program and thread? Different types of proce    Define virtual memory, thrashing, threa
    What is RAID ? Different typ    What is a deadlock ? Different conditions to achieve a deadlo    What is fragmentation? Types of fragmentation. 
    What is spooling ? 
    What is semaphore and mutex (Differences might be asked)? Define Binary semaphore. 
    Belady’s Anomaly
    Starving and Aging in OS
    Why does trashing occur? 
    What is paging and why do we need it? 
    Demand Paging, Segmentation 
    Real Time Operating System, types of RTOS. 
    Difference between main memory and secondary memory. 
    Dynamic Binding 
    FCFS Scheduling 
    SJF Scheduling 
    SRTF Scheduling 
    LRTF Scheduling 
    Priority Scheduling 
    Round Robin Scheduling 
    Producer Consumer Problem 
    Banker’s Algorithm 
    Explain Cache
    Diff between direct mapping and associative mapping 
    Diff between multitasking and multiprocessing 


DBMS: 
    What is DBMS ? Mention advantages.. 
    What is Database? 
    What is a database system? 
    What is RDBMS ? Properties.. 
    Types of database languages 
    ACID properties (VVVVV IMP) 
    Difference between vertical and horizontal scaling 
    What is sharding 
    Keys in DBMS 
    Types of relationship 
    Data abstraction in DBMS, three levels of it 
    Indexing in DBMS 
    What is DDL (Data Definition Language) 
    What is DML (Data Manipulation Language)
    What is normalization ? Types of them .. 
    What is denormalization ? 
    What is functional dependency ? 
    E-R Model ? 
    Conflict Serializability in DBMS .. 
    Explain Normal forms in DBMS 
    What is CCP ? (Concurrency Control Protocols) 
    Entity, Entity Type, Entity Set, Weak Entity Set.. 
    What are SQL commands ? Types of them.. 
    Nested Queries in SQL ? 
    What is JOIN .. Explain types of JOINs 
    Inner and Outer Join 
    Practice sql queries from leetcode
    Diff between 2 tier and 3 tier architecture 
    Diff between TRUNCATE and DELETE command .. 
    Difference between Intension and Extension in a DataBase
    Difference between share lock and exclusive lock, definition of lock 


Compute Networks: 
    Define network 
    What do you mean by network topology, and explain types of them 
    Define bandwidth, node and link ? 
    Explain TCP model .. 
    Layers of OSI model 
    Significance of Data Link Layer
    Define gateway, difference between gateway and router .. 
    What does ping command do ? 
    What is DNS, DNS forwarder, NIC, ? 
    What is MAC address ? 
    What is IP address, private IP address, public IP address, APIPA ? 
    Difference between IPv4 and IPv6
    What is subnet ? 
    Firewalls 
    Different type of delays 
    3 way handshaking 
    Server-side load balancer
    RSA Algorithm 
    What is HTTP and HTTPS protocol ? 
    What is SMTP protocol ? 
    TCP and UDP protocol, prepare differences
    What happens when you enter “google.com” (very very famous question) 
    Hub vs Switch 
    VPN, advantages and disadvantages of it 
    LAN 


OOPS:
    What is meant by the term OOPs?
    What is the need for OOPs?
    What are some major Object Oriented Programming languages?
    What are some other programming paradigms other than OOPs?
    What is meant by Structured Programming?
    What are the main features of OOPs?
    What are some advantages of using OOPs?
    Why is OOPs so popular?
    What is a class?
    What is an object?
    What is encapsulation?
    What is Polymorphism?
    What is Compile time Polymorphism and how is it different from RuntimePolymorphism?
    How does C++ support Polymorphism?
    What is meant by Inheritance?
    What is Abstraction?
    How much memory does a class occupy?
    Is it always necessary to create objects from class?
    What is a constructor?
    What are the various types of constructors in C++?
    What is a copy constructor?
    What is a destructor?
    Are class and structure the same? If not, what's the difference between a class and a structure?
    Explain Inheritance with an example?
    Are there any limitations of Inheritance?
    What are the various types of inheritance?
    What is a subclass?
    Define a superclass?
    What is an interface?
    What is meant by static polymorphism?
    What is meant by dynamic polymorphism?
    What is the difference between overloading and overriding?
    How is data abstraction accomplished?
    What is an abstract class?
    How is an abstract class different from an interface?
    What are access specifiers and what is their significance?
    What is an exception?
    What is meant by exception handling?
    What is meant by Garbage Collection in OOPs world?
    Can we run a Java application without implementing the OOPs concept?
    What is the output of the below code?
    What will be the output of the below code?
    Predict the output?
    What will be the output in below code?
    Predict the output?
    What is the output of the below program?







    